OSDOCS-1630 - RHCOS bootupd overview (#28071)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/architecture-rhcos-updating-bootloader.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * architecture/architecture_rhcos.adoc

[id="architecture-rhcos-updating-bootloader.adoc_{context}"]
= Updating the bootloader using bootupd

To update the bootloader using bootupd, you must either install bootupd on {op-system} machines manually, or provide a machine config with the enabled systemd unit. Unlike grubby or other bootloader tools, bootupd does not manage kernel space configuration such as passing kernel arguments.

Once installed, you can manage bootupd remotely from the {product-title} cluster.

[NOTE]
====

> It is recommended that bootupd is used only on bare metal or virtualized hypervisor installations to protect the boot process from a threat such as the BootHole vulnerability.

Author: Or maybe:
It is recommended that you use bootupd only on bare metal or virtualized hypervisor installations, such as for protection against the BootHole vulnerability.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * architecture/architecture_rhcos.adoc

> [id="architecture-rhcos-updating-bootloader.adoc_{context}"]

Reviewer: The architecture section isn't supposed to have concrete procedural information. All of the task-like entities in this section are meant for purely information purposes, not to actually *do* anything. I think this information is in the wrong place.

Author: Thanks, @kalexand-rh. I wondered about this. I initially added the procedure in the RHCOS architecture docs because it follows a couple of pseudo-procedural sections ("Viewing Ignition configuration files" and "Changing Ignition configs after installation") I was unaware that the arch section shouldn't have procedures, although I can see why that should be the case.

Based on the [note](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/28071/files#diff-fa7191a8c6a55b5de8a3aa4e58352ec544b4bf4ae31dbdc650234510c673d973R12-R15) elsewhere in this PR that `bootupd` should only be used for metal and hypervisor installs, I am moving its procedure module to the bare metal install docs and to the vSphere UPI docs as part of (but towards the end of) their respective RHCOS section.

I'll be curious to know what you and @codyhoag think of this approach.

Author: I've also removed many of the hard wraps that I encountered to bring up to current OSDOCS guidelines.

Reviewer 2: If the boot loader is only relevant for vSphere and bare metal UPI, I don't see any issues including them in the sections you've outlined. :+1:

Author: > If the boot loader is only relevant for vSphere and bare metal UPI, I don't see any issues including them in the sections you've outlined. 👍

@ashcrow Does it make sense to you if I move the bootupd install procedure to the vSphere and bare metal UPI docs?

Reviewer 3: It makes sense to me @bobfuru.

= Updating the bootloader using bootupd

> To update the bootloader using bootupd, you must either install bootupd on {op-system} machines manually, or provide a machine config with the enabled systemd unit. Unlike grubby or other bootloader tools, bootupd does not manage kernel space configuration such as passing kernel arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update the bootloader by using `bootupd`, you must either install `bootupd` on {op-system} machines manually or provide a machine config with the enabled `systemd` unit. Unlike grubby or other bootloader tools, `bootupd` does not manage kernel space configuration such as passing kernel arguments.
```

Author: Applied, thanks - and good to be in sync with the Release Notes that now use the same conventions thanks to your previous review! :)

> Once installed, you can manage bootupd remotely from the {product-title} cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you install `bootupd`, you can manage it remotely from the {product-title} cluster.
```

[NOTE]
====
It is recommended that you use bootupd only on bare metal or virtualized hypervisor installations, such as for protection against the BootHole vulnerability.
====

.Manual install method

> You can manually install bootupd using the `bootctl` command-line tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manually install bootupd by using the `bootctl` command-line tool.
```

. Inspect the system status:
+
[source,terminal]
----
# bootupctl status
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
Component EFI
  Installed: grub2-efi-x64-1:2.04-31.fc33.x86_64,shim-x64-15-8.x86_64
  Update: At latest version
----

[start=2]

> . Older {op-system} images that predate the existence of bootupd require an explicit adoption phase.

Reviewer: Is there a more concrete way that you can put this?

Author: I've changed to:

> . {op-system} images created without `bootupd` installed on them require an explicit adoption phase.
> +
> If the system status is `Adoptable`, perform the adoption:

+

> If the status displayed is `Adoptable`, perform the adoption:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the system status is `Adoptable`, perform the adoption:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
# bootupctl adopt-and-update
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
Updated: grub2-efi-x64-1:2.04-31.fc33.x86_64,shim-x64-15-8.x86_64
----

. If an update is available, apply the update so that the changes take effect on the next reboot:
+
[source,terminal]
----
# bootupctl update
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
Updated: grub2-efi-x64-1:2.04-31.fc33.x86_64,shim-x64-15-8.x86_64
----

.Machine config method
Another way to enable bootupd is by providing a machine config.

> * Provide a machine config file with the enabled systemd unit, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Provide a machine config file with the enabled `systemd` unit, as shown in the following example:
```
